#Chapter 1 The Case for the New Aesthetic

In September 2014 at the Emmanuel Gallery on the Auraria Campus in
Denver, Colorado, an exhibition titled ‘The Emperor’s New Aesthetic’
opened; though it received little notice and, to date, no reviews,
nevertheless its premise as a critique of the New Aesthetic as ‘an
overused and over-hyped term’ was immediately evident. ‘The idea is to
poke fun at the burgeoning institutionalization of “the new aesthetic”,
“post-internet” and “new-media” art in general, while still
acknowledging the potential for cultural, political, economic and
aesthetic intervention inherent in control of access / protocols /
networks.’[^1] Obviously, we take issue with that premise. The New
Aesthetic, we believe, is a recent and important phenomenon, permeating
much of everyday life as well as more rarified circles in academia and
the art world; a perfect example of this is the proposed new designs of
Norwegian banknotes that were revealed in October 2014[^2] and which use
a broad arrangement of pixels in a manner supposedly ‘typically Nordic’
in character but which, perhaps deceptively or unconsciously, could be
more accurately described as driven by a digital aesthetic. {Fig. 1}
  
![](img/Fig001.tiff) Fig. 1 Norge Bank Notes

The
contrast between the frivolity of the Denver exhibition and the serious
nature of the proposed banknotes is telling; to think of a purely
digital design as endemically related to a national identity means that
the digital has inserted itself into the way we conceive and construct
our own identities. This chapter is focused on making the case that the
New Aesthetic is worth an extended and serious look.

To make the case that the New Aesthetic is worth studying perhaps a
little history is a good place to start with even though it’s only the
most recent of histories. The New Aesthetic as a project was started by
James Bridle, a London-based writer, publisher and artist, upon
launching a new personal website in May 2011.[^3] The first significant
public and off-internet discussion on the New Aesthetic was held in 2012
at the SXSW conference, one of the most influential creative events in
the world, attended by artists, curators, scholars and professional
nerds. The panel entitled ‘The New Aesthetic: Seeing Like Digital
Devices’ gathered Aaron Cope (designer and engineer), Ben Terrett
(designer), Joanne McNeil (art activist, journalist), Russell Davies
(communications consultant and tech journalist) and James Bridle. In the
description of the panel, Bridle stated:

> We are becoming acquainted with new ways of seeing: the Gods-eye view
> of satellites, the Kinect’s inside-out sense of the living room, the
> elevated car-sight of Google Street View, the facial obsessions of
> CCTV \[…\] As a result, these new styles and senses recur in our art,
> our designs, and our products. The pixelation of low-resolution
> images, the rough yet distinct edges of 3D printing, the shifting
> layers of digital maps. In this session, the participants will give
> examples of these effects, products and artworks, and discuss the ways
> in which ways of seeing are increasingly transforming ways of making
> and doing.[^4]

In many ways Bridle’s description of the New Aesthetic is intentionally
vague but, at the same time, it did more than just provide a series of
loosely curated examples; it was clear in 2012 that Bridle was still
grappling with the idea and that his blog was functioning like a
curatorial manifesto in his efforts to describe and categorize it at the
time, but at the same time its vagueness certainly created opportunities
that engaged others. {Fig. 2}

![](img/Fig002.tiff) Fig. 2 ‘Le Pixel Umbrella’

The New Aesthetic panel at SXSW and the critique that followed right
after, made the term popular and helped it to gain attention among
certain groups and individuals on the web, e.g. the ‘\#newaesthetic’
hashtag began appearing on Twitter. It went viral and resulted in many
conflicting interpretational approaches and views on what it really was
and which technologically-rooted social and cultural phenomena and
artifacts could be described as examples of the New Aesthetic. The broad
scope of visual media considered as the New Aesthetic was described by
Bruce Sterling in his famous essay published in *Wired* magazine, which
included ‘\[…\] Satellite views. Parametric architecture. Surveillance
cameras. Digital image processing. Data-mashed video frames. Glitches
and corruption artifacts. Voxelated 3D pixels in real-world geometries.
Dazzle camou. Augments. Render ghosts. And, last and least, nostalgic
retro 8bit graphics from the 1980s.’[^5] Sterling’s description shows
that he was starting to catch on to the notion that there was this new
thing, this new approach, this new attitude, that could be utilized in
an extensive, horizontal and synchronic approach, taking into account
various artifacts, media, tools and works of art of digital origin.
Additionally, a number of the first commenters of the New Aesthetic
grabbed on to the various categories of computational miscalculations
and glitches as a way of identifying fascinating and inhumanly flawed
contemporary imagery as a vital element of the New Aesthetic’s fields of
interest, in a way that contributed new insights into some of the
discussions about the glitch that had been taking place in recent years.
Some critics stressed the political consequences of increased
human-technology interaction as seen by the New Aesthetic.[^6] Others
emphasized its social and gender-specific context e.g. the ‘politics of
the gaze’[^7] problem (male vs. machine vs. human).[^8] David M. Berry
valued the New Aesthetic for stimulating interest in the computational
aspects of contemporary civilization and their political and cultural
impact, but at the same time stressed the unconditional inclusiveness of
the term that result in its vagueness in terms of the accuracy of
description and information.[^9] On the other hand, Bruce Sterling
criticized its supporters for the anthropomorphisation of technological
artifacts, arguing that their assertion that computers are praiseworthy
because their effects are apparently analogous to conscious decisions is
like praising the Freudian unconsciousness as an autonomous agent.[^10]

Quickly, the New Aesthetic became a hot topic of conversation, and the
term became commonplace at least among those interested in technology’s
development and impact on society. Yet, almost just as quickly some of
those interested in the New Aesthetic turned away from it, including
James Bridle himself. Obviously, we’re not in that crowd.

What fascinates us about the New Aesthetic cannot be summarized neatly.
It is a non-movement that can’t be easily defined but can be easily
indicated. It’s really cool, in a way, that a thorough academic approach
to the New Aesthetic has not emerged so far when so many new categories
instantly become the subjects of a feverish academic onslaught.[^11] The
New Aesthetic aims to cover so many contemporary social and cultural
phenomena that any disciplinary approach would be too limited to analyze
it as a whole. However, only a few weeks after the SXSW 2012 conference,
a seminar was organized in the Netherlands in order to elaborate a
critical study of the New Aesthetic. As a result of a booksprint
session, a freely available e-book called *New Aesthetics, New
Anxieties* was written by six authors – new media scholars, artists,
curators and writers.[^12] The authors focused on many aspects of the
non-movement emphasizing the misunderstandings and anxieties generated
by many instances considered as examples of the New Aesthetic. The
authors were also interested in the influence of network-based
initiatives as the New Aesthetic on their professional work. They
‘attempt to move beyond lazy thinking, positions of pious indifference
or naive enthusiasm, and ask what the New Aesthetic might tell us about
this juncture in which we find ourselves, as curators, critics, artists,
theorists and creative workers’.[^13] Yet this remains, to date, the
only sustained academic treatment of the subject.

Perhaps what tempts us to think about the New Aesthetic is that it is an
offspring of easily accessible and open web-based communication channels
which, therefore, means that it’s become excessively pervasive and
accessible. The initial response to the New Aesthetic can be
characterized as an intellectual crowdsourcing of collective
intelligence formed of theoreticians and practitioners interested in
human-technology interaction, but we believe that the New Aesthetic is
so wide-spread that care about its effects should be more general. The
viral nature of contemporary communication channels resulted in a rapid
spread of the term and the engagement of multiple agents in its
development, leaving a discussion of this increasingly important
development to the vagaries of a passing fad as it hits the peak of its
popularity lasting no more than a few months is a mistake.

The New Aesthetic is primarily, though not entirely, an internet-based
approach or a cultural phenomenon and, as such, affects or will affect
the lives of the entirety of humanity; as a result, we could describe it
as a real-time web-based enquiry, one that functions within the
construct of web-based activity and is determined by the conditions of
the enquiry; but for the fact that its inclusiveness permits a multitude
of interpretational approaches and standpoints, thinking through the
manifestations of the New Aesthetic is already conditionally
predetermined. Even if our efforts only result in a definition rife with
the vagueness of the term and lacking a firm theoretical background, we
still take the position, as Bruce Sterling has accurately observed, that
the New Aesthetic has touched something new and important.

What makes the New Aesthetic such a challenge is more than just the fact
that it exists at all; Sterling wrote ‘It’s our fault for pretending
otherwise, for fooling ourselves, for projecting our own qualities onto
phenomena that we built, that are very interesting to us, but not at all
like us.’[^14] We’ve both created the New Aesthetic and become a
recipient of its existence’s implication and, in the digital realm,
therefore, to critically think about it means that it’s necessary to
utilize it at times uncritically. The New Aesthetic covered so many
theoretical and practical fields (i.e. media art, media archaeology,
digital art, digital aesthetics HCI, internet privacy, object-oriented
ontology, programming) that its lack of coherence and methodology was
essentially implemented in the movement from its early days. Even James
Bridle explained that he did not intend to create a new big idea or an
ontology of the 21st century. It seems that Bridle wanted to encourage
people to engage in a discussion, using as many approaches and various
expert knowledge as possible. Concrete methodology and disciplinary
boundaries were of second importance:

> One of the things about New Aesthetic was that it was very much
> supposed to be not “post” anything else and not “pre” anything else,
> it was an observation about something hopefully grander, of which
> these are some current examples of.[^15]

That is why Bridle chose a blog as a platform for sharing his ideas,
instead of an academic journal or professional magazines, as the
influence of these channels of communication is rather small compared to
open internet platforms. As an example of a new type of enquiry that
benefits from informal channels of communication and information
distribution, the New Aesthetic as a set of phenomena seems almost
naturally situated on (or even limited to) the web precisely because it
has been discussed solely on blogs, on social media and popularized by
talks at business and cultural conferences, but there’s so much more to
be said. Such supposed limitations of theoretical inquiry accompany any
discussion of the New Aesthetic, making evident the discomfort
traditional academia still has with blogs and online discussions as a
source of critical inquiry. It could be argued that the New Aesthetic is
just an artistic performance of a British designer who decided to ‘test’
the creative communities on the web – though Bridle himself writes that
it is an ‘ongoing research project’ – but then again, clearly, the
commentators responded to his call. At the peak of the popularity of the
New Aesthetic, Bridle was so overwhelmed by the interest that he even
suspended the blog for some time, evidence of a growing awareness of its
impact.[^16]

The New Aesthetic is not without its limitations. It is hardly a firm
academic theory or methodology.

Bruce Sterling argued in ‘An Essay on the New Aesthetic’ that the New
Aesthetic was a very interesting movement, at least potentially. However
Sterling also seems to be saying that, due to its extensiveness and
rhizomatic nature, the very notion of the New Aesthetic wasn’t bold and
critical enough. Many examples of the New Aesthetic were only partially
described or analyzed, but together they form a collective composed of
artifacts, media, tools and works of art that is a direct result of
contemporary information flow enhanced by web-based communication and
they will continue to occur in the future. That is why many of its
commentators emphasized that this approach could be developed in various
directions. At the present stage of development it is more like a
signpost for further enquiry.

The analysis of the New Aesthetic was performed from two perspectives.
The first one focuses on its inner logic and takes into account one of
the themes that the New Aesthetic itself is concerned with – revealing
the grain of computation in digital visual media by focusing on
glitches, image processing artifacts etc. By emphasizing the abnormal in
digital images, we can fully perceive its computational materiality
along with limitations of today’s visual media. Taking into account
rapid technological development – high-definition images and displays,
intuitive interfaces and services – this approach seems crucial for a
critical and postdigital enquiry on the status of today’s media. The
second perspective studies various forms of visual media in the spirit
of the New Aesthetic, identifying their complexity, processual nature
and their standardization, as the effect of the New Aesthetic becomes
more perceptible like, for example, in the previously mentioned recent
design of the Norges Bank currency.

At least one thing is clear: the New Aesthetic is dependent on the
digital turn, the shift in contemporary culture when information
presentation has moved from being an analog ontological relation to a
digital relation. This has involved more than simply a change in the
form of the information but a radical shift in the style of the
presentation of the information; as Wim Westera writes:

> Technology and human life are inextricable. Whatever we do is either
> directly or indirectly linked with machines, tools, or digital media.
> Any product we buy, be it peanut butter, fruit, or a bunch of flowers
> is the outcome of a hidden processing chain containing numerous
> calculations, transport, raw materials, mechanics, administrative
> files, orders, and coordinative messages, many of which are carried by
> digital media.[^17]

Everything has become digitized and, thus, every set of information
surrounding our lives has become digitally available. In this respect,
the digital turn is a real-time operative and manifest condition that
has emerged as a schizophrenic force in contemporary society, whereby we
are able to both control our world digitally but whereby we can also be
controlled digitally in a way that is ignorant of such control.
Recognizing the importance of the digital has become a de rigueur
exercise among cultural theorists, such that descriptions of its
pervasive presence and power are commonplace and widely accepted. David
M. Berry writes: ‘From its early days as a mechanism used to perform
data processing, the digital is becoming the de facto medium for
transmitting information, communicating and for sharing social life.
Through these important functions the digital becomes a privileged site
for social and political engagement and therefore it is increasingly
important that we understand the digital and offer the possibility of a
critical theory of the digital.’[^18] While such a perspective is
received unquestionably in all branches of cultural theory, nevertheless
the shift of the digital from a functional tool to a ‘de facto medium of
information’ is startling in its implications and cannot be taken for
granted; whereas the horizon of digital objects once was a set of
explorable and relatively unknown territories, wedged into limited but
functioning parameters by computer scientists so that they could be
employed as an external language and utilized to increase the accuracy
of describing our experience and codifying the resultant data, today
we’re in entirely different circumstances. The creation of code now
feeds the evolutionary and organic growth of the digital in order for it
to operate with even greater autonomy, independent of the rarified
controls found in a computer science laboratory. Witnessing the growth
of apps available for Apple iOS as just one example – what started with
500 in 2008[^19] has now reached 1,200,000 by mid-2014[^20] – is like
witnessing the exponential replication of viruses and bacteria. Over the
course of several decades we have been increasingly relying on the
computational in many domains of our activity at a civilizational level:
in business it has taken over with algorithmically-based high-frequency
trading, with approximately 73% of the equity trading and 60% of futures
trading in the United States occurring without any human decision;
societally our ability to bank, shop and interact with our fellow human
beings is increasingly governed by our digital presence, with Facebook
now becoming a legally serviceable address for court documents in
Australia, New Zealand, the UK, Germany and other countries; and in
cultural activity where there is a persistent decline in the education
in and use of analog technology like photography film in favor of
digital cameras to the point that the majority of universities
world-wide are exclusively hiring digital photographers as faculty
members. We are not favoring the analog and we’re certainly not
Luddites, but the digital turn has become more than just a ‘turn’,
instead it’s become a dominant force in contemporary society that is
increasingly beyond the control of its users. Technological
advancements, still to some extent based on Moore’s law, are resulting
in a logarithmically exponential increase of the computational capacity
of electronic devices, but what is fascinating is that the limitations
of the applicability of computational capacity may not be limited so
much by hardware but rather by its intrusion into human capacity, in
that there will be at some point fewer and fewer opportunities for
digitalization to govern the world. We are living in a time in which it
is becoming increasingly difficult to realize and act analogically. In
this respect the New Aesthetic becomes a signpost, of sorts, that the
digital has become more of a processual condition that our civilization
is based on, instead of being just a ‘turn’ or a ‘revolution’ understood
as a fixed moment in time.

To simply list a series of examples of digital phenomena in our world is
insufficient. From our perspective, the tendency towards pervasive
digitalization could be assessed by focusing on either its ontological
effects or through an analysis of various epistemological perspectives.
In the case of the ontological, often an important tenant of the digital
humanities, there is a tendency to move towards the conclusion that all
experience is digital at its foundation. With an emphasis on the
abstraction of real world experiences into digitally accounted data,
through the persistence and pragmatic reduction of sequential
experiences to concomitant time-related informational streams and in the
increasingly complex and assumptive manifestation of desire structures
of data-dependent human beings, we run headlong into situations such as
Ashton’s the Internet of Things; the convergence of connected devices
starts to not only predicate decisions about replacing items in vending
machines, for example, or governs market supply chains, but even more
preemptively starts to choose our homes’ temperatures prior to our
return to work based on digitally evolving models of our preferences. As
a result, a whole new species of semi-autonomous and autonomous beings
have become vital constituents of our lives both at an individual and at
a social level. A digital ontology asserts that the entire nature of
reality is structured, and the digital becomes the sole means whereby
the structure is effectively navigated. In the case of the epistemic,
the status of knowledge has changed as it has become digitized; whereas
epistemic questions once were subjected to logic and rationality, with
the likes of Descartes and Kant painstakingly exploring nuances and
dead-ends in the hopes of being self-satisfied that the answers to their
questions were ensconced within necessary and sufficient conditions, the
notions of big data and meta-data assert that the world can only be
known once it has been digitized and, as knowledge itself ceases to be
locally relative, that it has become singularly absolute. Things are
true because we’ve read them (not read about them, but ‘read them’) on
the internet, which we’re always carrying around in our pocket, with
philosophical implication extending beyond the epistemic and ontological
concerns into the necessity of a teleological approach.

Focusing on either an ontological or epistemic position yields
interesting insights, but often it becomes entangled in an implied
negative critique of the digitalization of the world. In the case of the
ontological perspective, resistance inevitably arises to the notion that
the world of experiences must necessarily be accounted for in a binary
manner; surely, it’s assumed, there will always be instances when the
digital method is insufficient, when directed rather than mediated
experience and an emotional response is more appropriate. In the case of
the epistemic perspective a negative critique runs along similar
notions, especially in the context of some Romantic idea of the primacy
of human rationality. These pitfalls are inevitable and, because they
are inevitable, we would like to avoid them. So where to turn? By
recognizing the dialectic between the ontological and the epistemic
perspectives, a synthesis is possible; given an ontological perspective
that turns outward to the world as it accounts for potential experience
in a relationship between an epistemic perspective that turns inward to
secure knowledge, there is a middle ground that is dependent on both
while being yet a third form of experience: the evaluative or the
aesthetic. Visual models of communication and information distribution
have increased social and cultural reliance on the digital,
necessitating analyzing contemporary society and culture in two ways:
first, by recognizing that the autonomous digital products have an
aesthetic existence in-and-of-themselves and second, by allowing for an
appreciative and evaluative approach to these objects. Ontological and
epistemological conditions of contemporary society manifest themselves
in everyday practices rooted in digital visual media which can be edited
and transformed into many kinds of media hybrids because of its powerful
processing units and creative software; it is those hybrids as synthetic
products that are, perhaps, the most interesting. We have reached the
point where autonomous and synthetic objects necessitate new approaches,
driving forms of artistic production.

What we mean by computational visual media is a category of digital
products that are more than just programmable pieces of data that are
often perceived through high-definition still images, movies, CGI or
graphical user interfaces but are experienceable and self-determining
phenomena in their own right, displayed on ultra-high definition
displays and accessed and edited thanks to intuitive user interfaces;
with the increasing processing power available in decreasing physical
parameters[^21] partnered with a graphic user interface that seemingly
grasps our intentions spontaneously and predictively, conditions are
being constructed whereby the output of the device assumes an
unquestioned and teleologically natural state. The very computational
materiality of today’s visual media is, indeed, hidden beneath layers of
user-friendly software, hardware, networks, cloud-based processing and
storage services to the point (and, importantly, designed to that point)
of increasing invisibility, with the implications or the
predeterminatively agreed conventions that it will just work without any
need for a user to change its operating parameters. {Fig. 3}

![](img/Fig003.tiff) Fig. 3 Image Processed Through Decim8

In many
respects, the benefits have been self-evident, and it’s impossible to
review the multitude of programs without being in awe of the
innovativeness and ingenuity of their designers and programs; this
extends beyond simply new ways of accounting for data or new ways of
manipulating data to entirely new ways of dealing with the mundane to
the profound: for instance, the explosion of new types of devices and
services has resulted in the continual development of services,
platforms and computational devices which foster new forms of cultural
and social engagement enhanced by technology, extending beyond simply
being able to contact friends and family instantaneously around the
world to being able to alter the political landscape through spontaneous
social collaboration and action. These phenomena occur right in front of
us and simultaneously affect many areas of human activity (business,
culture, science), both at an industrial and at a consumer level of
human-computer interaction in a positive and productive way. We have
entered an era of real-time communication and knowledge generation and
distribution that is fostered by multi-purpose devices and mobile
internet access – many new ideas are now born due to the inclusive and
non-hierarchical models of web-based communication, such as personal
publishing services (blogs, websites), social media and informal
discussion groups where both professionals and non-professionals as well
as practitioners and theoreticians alike share and discuss new ideas –
but what is increasingly clear is that these phenomena are synthetic in
nature and effect, affecting and transforming in their use our
perception of the world while simultaneously creating their own worlds.
In short, we’ve entered a new form of experience best labeled
‘postdigital’ as an indication that the digital revolution is over.[^22]
The world of raw data and technology, while being in front of us, is
usually hidden underneath graphical user interfaces, smooth high-res
images, seamless user experience and touch-screen Retina displays. The
New Aesthetic rejects ‘screen essentialism’ and encourages us to
perceive contemporary reality as an ‘augmented space’ filled both with
human agents and computational artifacts (devices, networks) that
interact and influence each other. Mel Alexenberg describes this as:

> Of or pertaining to art forms that address the humanization of digital
> technologies through interplay between digital, biological, cultural,
> and spiritual systems, between cyberspace and real space, between
> embodied media and mixed reality in social and physical communication,
> between high tech and high touch experiences, between visual, haptic,
> auditory, and kinesthetic media experiences, between virtual
> and augmented reality, between roots and globalization, between
> autoethnography and community narrative, and between web-enabled
> peer-produced wikiart and artworks created with alternative media
> through participation, interaction, and collaboration in which the
> role of the artist is redefined.[^23]

The key here is the betweenness, the notion of a mixed reality, the
synthesis. Baudrillard was only partially correct: what governs our
experiences is not hyperreality but hyperrealities. It is in this space
that the New Aesthetic has emerged and is defined.

The digital visual culture that has been a foundation for the emergence
of the New Aesthetic is just one of the manifestations of a greater
shift our civilization has been undergoing with the digital turn and
postdigital aesthetics; the New Aesthetic has necessitated not just a
new perspective but a new approach or a new type of attenuation.
Postdigital aesthetics require a cross-disciplinary theoretical and
practical approach, which addresses the trends described above, going
far beyond a mere theory of beauty of digital images.

## <span id="_Toc321914088" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc321914194" class="anchor"></span></span>Real-Time Effects of the New Aesthetic

The New Aesthetic, for example, emerged as a direct result of real-time
communication channels enhanced by computational technologies. On the
one hand it can be understood as an approach useful in digital image
analysis as it unveils the simultaneous materiality and instability of
contemporary imagery by focusing on the abnormal (image processing
errors, glitches, artifacts etc.) On the other hand, taking into account
the origin and development of this approach the New Aesthetic should be
considered as one of the manifestations of the radical shift in the
emergence of ideas and knowledge distribution in the digital age. The
New Aesthetic is based on real-time data generation and distribution as
it was born and developed thanks to internet-based channels of
communication and exchange of ideas, but what emerges with the New
Aesthetic is something quite powerful that remained relatively unnoticed
until James Bridle started his blog in May 2011. Nowadays this approach
can be generally described as a cross-disciplinary approach recognizing
the consequences of synthetic and autonomous objects through
human-technology interaction and an analysis of new non-anthropomorphic
agents, forces and computational patterns that are present both in the
digital sphere and in the physical world. As the identification process
of New Aesthetic objects accelerated and grew in confidence, it became
clear that they were manifesting themselves through visual digital media
and new social and cultural practices involving humans and technological
artifacts in a plethora of fashions. Bridle’s initial focus on the
visual manifestations of the New Aesthetic prompted the blog’s
horizontal stream layout containing several types of digital visual
media: images, movies, graphics, GIFs. In his first entry, James Bridle
wrote:

> Since May 2011 I have been collecting material which points towards
> new ways of seeing the world, an echo of the society, technology,
> politics and people that co-produce them. The *New Aesthetic* is not a
> movement, it is not a thing which can be done. It is a series of
> artifacts of the heterogeneous network, which recognizes differences,
> the gaps in our distant but overlapping realities.[^24]

And, on another occasion:

> I started noticing things like this in the world. This is a cushion on
> sale in a furniture store that’s pixelated. This is a strange thing.
> This is a look, a style, a pattern that didn’t previously exist in the
> real world. It’s something that’s come out of digital. It’s come out
> of a digital way of seeing, that represents things in this form. The
> real world doesn’t, or at least didn’t, have a grain that looks like
> this.[^25]

In this sense, to analyze the New Aesthetic is to engage in a form of
topological description from a new perspective and position, identifying
relations that exist beyond simply manifest usage to objects that are
autonomous. This has been done before in a parallel way for similar
objects, and in analyzing the New Aesthetic we intend to follow the
phenomenologically driven methodology introduced by Vilém Flusser in his
1983 book *Towards a Philosophy of Photography*.

Flusser’s approach is useful both for studying the inner logic of the
New Aesthetic (its interest in computational images) and for analyzing
it as one of the manifestations of computationality understood as a
condition of contemporary civilization. Flusser argued that by
describing complex relations between a camera (apparatus) and a human
being (user) we can shed light on the condition of contemporary
civilization which is founded on (mega)mass production and distribution
of images, writing: ‘The invention of photography constitutes a break in
history that can only be understood in comparison to that other
historical break constituted by the invention of linear writing.’[^26]
In the process of being able to reproduce the appearance of reality, the
status of such reproductions became portable, mobile, and transmittable;
whereas descriptions of the world were once dependent on lengthy
exposition of words, photography placed an immediate form of perception
in the hands of everyone, especially as the technology became less
expensive, more widely available, and needed decreasing amounts of
intervention on the part of the image producer to create satisfactory
images. To put it another way, Flusser argued convincingly that
photography constituted a new form of knowledge, one that didn’t need a
mediating subjectivity explicating at length its intended effect. What
is especially important about Flusser’s ideas in relation to the New
Aesthetic is that this shift from writing to photography was entirely
dependent on technological innovation; the camera became more than just
a tool, it became an apparatus that could be manipulated by the user but
which had a schematized set of limitations that were, nevertheless,
assumed to be sufficient and self-sufficient to the task. He explained
that, ‘nothing can resist the force of this current of technical images
– there is no artistic, scientific or political activity which is not
aimed at it, there is no everyday activity which does not aspire to be
photographed, filmed, video-taped’.[^27] In essence, this shift marks a
relinquishment of the user of their freedom to the apparatus’ methods,
creating a new topology of knowledge that had profound ontological and
epistemic consequences because the user, even if they believe they are
exerting control over the photographic process, never produces images
except through the programmed character of the apparatus. Flusser
recognized that this shift and its consequences needed to be addressed,
writing:

> It is consequently the task of a philosophy of photography to expose
> this struggle between human being and apparatuses in the field of
> photography and to reflect on a possible solution to the conflict
> \[…\] \[I\] will illustrate that the photographic universe can serve
> as a model for post-industrial society as a whole and that a
> philosophy of photography can be the starting point for any philosophy
> engaging with the current and future existence of human beings.[^28]

In many respects, Flusser is arguing for two paths of philosophical
effort: first, that philosophy should investigate how any epistemology
is inevitably changed by photography and second, what moral and ethical
challenges need to be addressed because of that change. Although his
argument was formulated in the 1980s, it is even more valid today as
computational power related to image making has increased exponentially
and through it, such that the standardization and quantification of
social and cultural practices are much more profoundly effected. While
we disagree with Flusser’s notion that advances in technology constitute
a threat to the human condition per se – in this respect, any notion of
a ‘threat’ is dependent on an attachment to the notion of being human as
having a culminating state of development, a high point if you will,
that seems excessively modernist in its origins – we absolutely agree
with his point that technology’s development towards networks of
automation independent of human control creates a new ontological
condition and extend it to the notion that photography represented
merely the first stage of technology’s pervasive encroachment into our
lives. If nothing else, the abandonment of analog cameras and, even,
digital cameras in favor of phones as photographic devices signals both
an end of photography’s technology as a determinant in our lives and the
furthered role of the postdigital turn that the New Aesthetic
represents.

The shift towards an emphasis on the visual is part of this new,
necessary attitude that recognizes the effect the New Aesthetic is
having in the world. The New Aesthetic is that new epistemic and
ontological condition, both of the world while making its own world.
Bridle’s cataloging of various objects, even if it was without any
sustained critical analysis of overlapping characteristics, made evident
that it is no longer sufficient to study contemporary visual phenomena
in terms of classic aesthetics; the digital nature of contemporary
imagery requires media studies, software studies and, in general, a
digitally informed approach particularly if we take into account changes
in the humanities as a set of academic disciplines as well as a set of
creative activities. What is particularly important, coming out of our
understanding of Flusser’s ideas, is to stress that this approach is
primarily through images, primarily through the visual. Think of the way
we interact with data today. One way is to look at projects such as the
Palladio platform, developed by the Human+Design Research Lab at
Stanford University, that takes on a justified faith that visual
representation of data leads to insightful and critical new discoveries
of the relations between various trends;[^29] at the Text Encoding
Initiative Conference in October 2014 at Northwestern University, Thomas
Faith and Joseph Wicentowski, working for the Office of the Historian in
the U.S. Department of State, presented ‘Visualizing the History of U.S.
Foreign Relations: The State of TEI at Foggy Bottom’ – how they’ve used
Palladio to visualize the encoded Foreign Relations of the United States
series, a 150 year old, 500 volume document that is the official history
of United States foreign policy.[^30] Another way is to consider the
development of Ubiquitous Learning Materials as an effort to shift the
educational process away from a linear instructor-centered model to an
immersive, social model utilizing mobile devices in order to remove the
stress of the classroom experience while preparing students for ‘real
life’; a perfect instance of this is the Philippines Smart
Communications’ project TXTBKS[^31] {Fig. 4} that provides transcribed
elementary school textbooks to children through discarded mobile phones.

![](img/Fig004.tiff) Fig. 4 Smart Philippines Textbooks

Everything is increasingly visual, including text to the detriment of
textuality. Still, these are singular instances and it is on the more
pervasive ways that we use data that we’re focusing: our worlds are not
our ‘smart’ phones just yet, but increasingly it feels that way, and the
very fact that they are described as ‘smart’ signals a shift in how much
we rely on them and how much we don’t rely on our own knowledge, our own
experiences, our own sense of our place in the world. Because the
aesthetics of digital images are a consequence of constant, real-time
interaction between many software and hardware layers that disappear as
they are supplanted by newer instances, and precisely because such
layers are the synthetic products of ontological and epistemic shifts
such that these interaction becomes aesthetic, we believe that there is
a necessity to shed light on the many ways in which digital images have
become autonomous actors in the world.

Because of this visuality, the nature of New Aesthetic objects is quite
different from normal digital objects. In most cases, digital products
adhere to a simple presentation of information, often governed by the
type of data being provided; by allowing a certain degree of
simplification one could propose an equation: digital visual media =
algorithms + data structure.[^32] An easy example of this is the typical
Excel spreadsheet, which has its origins in a program called Multiplan,
was code named ‘EP’ for ‘Electronic Paper’ and released in 1982 as a
competitor for Lotus 1-2-3.[^33] Multiplan’s code name is revealing in
that there was every intention of imitating and being visually analogous
to an accounting ledger’s columns for ease of use. However, digital
objects have shifted dramatically as contemporary digital images have
increasingly become products of software ecosystems, which offer certain
pre-determined templates and cross-media processing and editing tools
that are often utilized as means of data organization and presentation
prior to their representation in a graphic user interface. New Aesthetic
objects as the most dynamic form of contemporary digital aesthetics are
therefore the product of a computational aesthetic based on media
software – within its limits and capabilities. By limits and
capabilities we mean their interfaces, the tools, and the techniques
they make possible for accessing, navigating, creating, modifying,
publishing, and sharing media documents i.e. creative software
ecosystems equipped with standardized presets, image processing tools
and ecosystems (GIMP, Adobe Creative Cloud), image encoding and decoding
standards (MPEG, JPEG etc.) There is hardly any element of software and
hardware that is neutral for the final aesthetics of the image. By
studying only the layer closest to us – the digital image displayed or
projected on the screen – we ignore the existence of hidden
computational layers and their influence on the aesthetics of the
images. The New Aesthetic reminds us that the computational layer of
digital media is inextricably linked with the cultural layer.[^34]

In this light, the New Aesthetic encourages us to take a postdigital
approach in studying computational-based visual media. This might lead
to a sense that we should only be interested in the surface of the
digital object, the screen through which the user interacts with the
software and hardware, but to keep that as the primary focus of
aesthetic analysis is a failure in light of normative aesthetic
interpretative strategies which demand a deep form of evaluation.
Therefore we argue that we should avoid screen essentialism – that is, a
screen-centric approach in image analysis as the privileged site for
research – precisely because we do not want to limit ourselves to
judgments of appearance or usability alone. Berry argues that ‘without
an attentiveness to the layers of software beneath this surface
interface we are in danger of further screen essentialism’.[^35] Indeed
he further remarks, ‘computational tools assist by providing mediation
and advising and providing structure for a world full of data, real-time
streams and complex calculations required from its citizens. This
computational assistance or monitoring is backgrounded and often hidden
from us.’[^36] Marianne van den Boomen also rejects the screen-centric
approach in her book on digital metaphors (particularly in studying
GUI), although her point is applicable to any kind of computationally
rooted imagery. She explains, ‘what you see, is what you get, which
suggests that, that is all there is to get. The machinery gets reduced
to the screen, or better, to the representations on the screen. The
screen shows but also blinds.’[^37] It is in the interplay between
screen and the underlying software and hardware that the New Aesthetic
manifests itself, not just in its immediate appearance. Although much of
the final aesthetic~~s~~ of the digital image is a direct result of the
existence of layers of underlying dynamics, in viewing the final image
we are not aware of them; even more so, increasingly, because digital
objects are dependent on a modular programming approach the final
designers themselves are not aware of the underlying functions actively
driving such things as notifications, interactions with system software
and interactions with additional software on the device. The raw
computational materiality of images comes to the foreground when we go
off-road from the usual models of image transformation and focus instead
on the breakdowns and abnormalities of the usual computational-based
artistic processes.

## <span id="_Toc321914089" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc321914195" class="anchor"></span></span>Abnormalities of the Digital, or Where the New Aesthetic Begins

That being said, all is not perfect. If there is any one feature that
distinguishes a New Aesthetic object from its predecessors it’s the
appearance of the glitch as accepted, even aesthetically determinative
and welcome, in contrast to visual hyperrealism understood as
standardization. One of the most important properties of contemporary
civilization considered as computationality is standardization, wherein
concomitant expectations of a similar experience are shared across
users; we expect a ‘polished’ experience, whatever that might mean, and
in many instances are startled when our software doesn’t ‘just work’.
Digitally-based culture, business, administration and other domains of
our human activity operate based on computational data with the
expectation that they ought to be standardized in order to guarantee a
constant flow of real-time information based on application programming
interfaces (APIs) and protocols. From the users’ perspective,
standardization is clearly visible in everyday practices of
human-computer interaction. We often operate within certain software and
hardware ecosystems which offer unified interfaces and user experience –
for example, Google, Apple, Microsoft or Adobe ecosystems – and this has
become a powerful notion, especially well articulated by Matthew Fuller
in his *Media Ecologies: Materialist Energies in Art and Technocultures*
as it emphasizes the role of the standard object in contemporary
computational culture. We would even argue that various types of
standard objects (physical – shipping containers or iPhones and digital
– codecs or file formats) have become a vital constituent of a
post-Fordist economy in that their consumption transcends industrial
modes of production in favor of individual contributive modes of
participation. According to Fuller, standard objects are ‘ideally
isolated systems’[^38] and separate entities within the universe and
Fuller, following Alfred Whitehead’s logic, argues that ‘such objects
become crucial to the generation of media and communications networks
and the organizations that handle them’ and then adds that the standard
object ‘refers most easily to things that are mass-produced: cars,
houses, the customizable ring of a telephone’ or standardized
technologies i.e. packet switching, compression algorithms etc.[^39]
Post-Fordist products are quite different in that they maintain a
semblance of standardization while at the same time being eminently
capable of being personalized; in fact, post-Fordist objects are sold to
the user on their basis of customization rather than on their standard
functionality.

The implications of this shift from standardization to customization is
quite profound. The appearance of ‘evidence’ of a shift from unmediated
consumption to mediated and synthetic personalization is an illusion; we
believe, at least unconsciously, that we are participants in the
‘manufacturing’ process, that our expectations are being personally met
precisely because they are our expectations that the manufacturer is
attentive to, but this mediated form of consumption is generally false
in many digital objects and particularly in New Aesthetic objects
because the programming skills necessary for such modifications is not
only beyond the skill level of the typical user but often entirely
ignored by the programmer. The importance of the shift away from
standard objects for today’s society and culture founded on
computational technologies is hardly arguable. James Stevens of Free
Networks, cited by Fuller, states that ‘The information age has boiled
down the magic of telecommunications into a set of modular components
that any of us can adopt and explore.’[^40] Nevertheless, this magic is
not even that because it’s not trickery that’s under the control of a
‘magician’ as programmer but a seduction of the user through the user
interface, a seduction the leads the user to erroneously believe they
are in control of them software and hardware. Taking Fuller’s
perspective, a critical approach to the New Aesthetic is an
identification of a new category of independent objects beyond the
post-Fordist, most easily identifiable by the acceptability of these
self-generated failures called glitches.

The glitch is a well-known phenomenon; often described as a short-term
error, it is often regarded as a small problem that can be either
ignored as unimportant or quickly fixed with minimal effort, minimal
knowledge or simply by resetting the device. {Fig. 5}

![](img/Fig005.tiff) Fig. 5 Glitch Image of Newscaster

New Aesthetic
objects, as a visual sub-genre sufficiently distinct from standard
digital objects, are different because they manifest the glitch as a
natural part of their use; while seemingly unintended they are often, at
a phenomenological level, inherent to these objects and making explicit
their distinctly digital and, most importantly, different form of
existence from our own. As a position of analysis, any investigation of
the New Aesthetic is particularly interested in glitches and signal
processing errors that result in image artifacts and deformations
because they represent a form of digital autonomy beyond the users’
control. If pixelization considered as an aesthetic pattern reveals the
‘grain of computation’ in digital media, glitches and errors unveil also
the very fact of media softwarization and the limitations of these
processes.

<span id="Chapter_1_The_Case_for_the_New" class="anchor"></span>It’s
safe to say that any glitches that appear would reveal that there’s no
human ‘management’ of memory, for instance, and that this lack of
management creates an exposure as an opportunity for autonomy. In this
state of exposed computation – which is all too often not exposed to the
user – the primal advantage of standardized systems found in seamless
digital data integration and transformation is no longer valid and
normally hidden forces of the computational are revealed to be a
continual disruption in the use-process. Consequently, not only the
aesthetic properties (quantization, discretization) of digital media are
clearly perceptible, but also the politics of power of the digital age
as the end-user needs are subordinated to workflows programmed by
software or hardware vendors. The New Aesthetic emphasizes the
computational nature of contemporary digital imagery precisely because
the glitch, or the potential for the glitch as a breakdown of the
immediacy of the user’s interactive capabilities, is an extensive
element of New Aesthetic objects that marks their independence through
an autonomous utterance. By focusing on visual patterns, glitches and
signal processing errors our analysis of the New Aesthetic highlights
this fundamental property of digital images which is usually hidden
beneath the state of the visual content. Up until this point it would be
natural to assume that New Aesthetic objects are only digital objects
appearing on laptops, smartphone and tablets, with some expansion, to
the interface found in everyday digital interfaces such as the screens
of ATM machines, the menus for digital television services or the
growing use of interactive touchscreens found at airports, train
stations, libraries and on vending machines, but these objects have been
a part of the modern social and cultural horizons for longer than
expected.

## <span id="_Toc321914090" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc321914196" class="anchor"></span></span>Constellations of the New Aesthetic

All of these certainly are examples of the growing number of New
Aesthetic objects – of course, not all examples are New Aesthetic
objects – but New Aesthetic objects are also found in the art and design
world in an important but distinctively different form. Every day we
perceive motion pictures, digital photographs, 3D graphics etc. and we
are seduced by their aesthetics; taking a cue from Kant, aesthetic
choices are a constant part of our lives as tests of epistemic certainty
and judgments of moral value; any analysis of these objects is also
going to become an analysis of similar art objects. In the modern world,
artists have been interested in the way the world has been influenced
not just by changes in technology but in the manner that technology has
often driven those changes. Ferdinand Léger’s 1919 painting *The City*
{Fig. 6} prophetically indicated what is true of our contemporary
experience of the world, that we would be bombarded by such a plethora
of levels of detail and color range, by the encoded linguistic structure
of modernity, that we would begin to give up and retreat from an active
representation of ourselves in the world into a passive absorption of
experience such that we would see thinking about the conditions of the
formation of communicative objects as beyond our control. 

![](img/Fig006.tiff) Fig. 6 Ferdinand Léger, *The City* (1919)

It is only in
the last ten years that Léger’s and Baudrillard’s vision of the world
has become a dominating characteristic of our age, and artists have
started to consciously use New Aesthetic styles to alert us to this
state of affairs. By employing digital images that are the result of
complex hardware and software interactions which fundamentally influence
their aesthetic, New Aesthetic artists such as Matthew
Plummer-Fernandez, Ralf Baeker, Mishka Henner, Aram Bartholl, and
Mathieu Tremblin remind us not only about New Aesthetic’s limitations
and unreliability but its effect that itself limits and makes
increasingly unreliable our experience of the world. This is extremely
important in the computer-driven age that we live in, in that the world
is becoming computer-driven and computer-determined. 
The authors of *New
Aesthetic, New Anxieties* write that ‘The New Aesthetic, in other words,
brings these patterns to the surface, and in doing so articulates a
movement towards uncovering the “unseen”, the little understood logic of
computational society and the anxieties that this introduces.’[^41]
Often, it is artists who best capture the anxiety and the potential in
the underlying conditions, and we look forward to discussing ways in
which contemporary artists are both utilizing and responding to the New
Aesthetic.

The New Aesthetic is like a hashtag or meta-tag assigned to many
phenomena, approaches, perspectives and people that we argue is more
than just a movement rooted in web 2.0 culture using the operational
logic of the hyperlinked interface and freely shareable information.
Therefore, from a classic academic perspective it may seem vague,
inaccurate and simply not worthy of any attention but it is a
manifestation of the greater ontological shift our civilization is
undergoing due to computational-driven processes and computational
literacy. In this respect, one of the central tenets of our description
of the New Aesthetic is based entirely on our belief that our
contemporaneity can be described as computationality. The concept of
computationality was coined by David M. Berry and is used in his
*Philosophy of Software Code and Mediation in the Digital Age* (2011),
on his blog (*stunlaw*) and was later developed in *Critical Theory and
the Digital* (2014). Berry writes: ‘Computationality is therefore an
ontotheology, which when read through Heideggerian categories can be
understood as creating a new ontological “epoch” or a new historical
constellation of intelligibility.’[^42] Computationality can be
understood as a set of social and cultural practices rooted in digital
technology. We can also consider it as an ontological description of the
contemporary civilization which is deeply shaped by software and digital
management of data. Therefore, computationality should be then
understood as the very condition for emergence of such approach as the
New Aesthetic, focusing on ‘revealing the grain of computation’, as it
enables us to perceive the conditions underlying contemporaneity
considered as computationality.

## <span id="_Toc321914091" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc321914197" class="anchor"></span></span>The Postdigital Condition

Why should we bother with yet another ‘post’ notion? Florian Cramer, one
of the first proponents of the ‘postdigital’ clearly stated that this
‘term sucks but is useful’.[^43] We are willing to agree with him on
that matter. In the following paragraphs we hope to prove that the
postdigital approach is of vital importance for our endeavor to
conceptualize the New Aesthetic. Additionally, the postdigital as
described by its advocates may be quite helpful in assessing the
cultural and social consequences of the latest computational
technologies – manifested by multi-layered software, black-box hardware
and ubiquitous computing. We agree with David M. Berry and Michael
Dieter who write that in the last decade, ‘computation \[has become\]
experimental, spatial and materialized in its implementation, embedded
within the environment and embodied, part of the texture of life itself
but also upon and even within the body’.[^44] Both the New Aesthetic and
the postdigital take into the spotlight unique characteristics and
affordances of the latest computational technologies, instead of just
putting them into the very same ‘digital basket’ where each and every
technological artifact has been residing in for the last thirty years.
Both the New Aesthetic and the postdigital signal and acknowledge the
fact that in the last few years, technology’s impact on society and
business has manifested itself in a profound and unprecedented scope.

Florian Cramer proposes several interpretative leads that we can use to
conceptualize the postdigital. Each of them touches upon a different set
of phenomena associated with the digital, taking into account some
cultural artifacts, computational tools and a few broader trends that
have lately emerged in the digital society, while responding to the
research questions asked by different academic disciplines. We are
proposing a kaleidoscope of the postdigital.

Following on Cramer’s work, we argue that the postdigital should not be
understood as a new temporal period that comes after the ‘digital’ as
its prefix would suggest. The postdigital rather strives to characterize
new economic, social and cultural contexts that have been introduced in
the last decade due to the general evolution of computational
technologies towards even more autonomous systems, ubiquitous devices,
real-time and cloud-based software and services. The term does not
describe an era which is no longer formed by the presence of
computational technologies. Quite the opposite, as it is rather
interested in emphasizing the fact that the ‘digital revolution’ has
already taken place, and through the latest innovations in the age of
autonomous systems, ubiquitous computing, networks and clouds, the
digital has been even more embedded with us and the environment. This
has left a profound imprint in many areas of our society and culture
such that the ‘“post-digital” in its simplest sense describes the messy
state of media, arts and design after their digitization (or at least
the digitization of crucial aspects of the channels through which they
are communicated)’.[^45] The postdigital is therefore interested in
assessing these consequences by locating, conceptualizing and critically
examining manifestations of the postdigital condition in society,
culture, economy etc. Cramer compares the postdigital to other post-like
notions (post-punk, post-communism, post-feminism, post-apocalyptic
etc.), emphasizing that the crucial difference between the initial
appearance of the idea or movement and its post- version is that it ‘has
progressed from a discrete breaking point to an ongoing condition – in
Heideggerian terms, from Ereignis to Being’.[^46] This is one of the
crucial points to be remembered when dealing with the postdigital. For
us, both the New Aesthetic and the postdigital approach offer a unique
paradigm that enables us to grasp and encapsulate various phenomena
within the area of media, art and culture that are distinctive for the
specific phase of evolution of the computational – the phase that came
right after the ‘digital revolution’ – that is now understood as a fixed
time event which has ended.

Cramer stresses that the postdigital stands in opposition to the
quasi-teleological and linear understanding of technological progress
that is centered around narratives of innovation, efficiency, disruption
etc. In these paradigms yet more powerful and efficient software and
hardware are the very conditions of social and cultural development of
our civilization potentially leading towards a sterile, high tech era.
The postdigital would oppose this tendency to argue that only by using
the digital technologies or by embedding the digital with the
non-computational physical environment and tools we can achieve our
social, economic and cultural goals. He therefore suggests that
proponents of the postdigital attitude should ‘dismiss the idea of
digital processing as the sole universal all-purpose form of information
processing.’[^47] This idea has been a dominating paradigm in popular
culture since the dawn of the personal computer, and later in the
so-called mobile revolution which was introduced by the smartphone and
broadband mobile internet access. What is really interesting, as we are
entering the age of Internet of Things when there will be endless
variations of small devices and single-use chips that will make ordinary
things ‘smart’ (fabric, vehicles, home appliances etc.), is that this
idea will evolve further. The digital in the IoT era will be even more
dispersed, hidden yet opaque in its nature.

According to Cramer and Kim Cascone the tendency to praise the
hyper-fidelity of the computational and the myth of perfect
representation is particularly visible in the domains of audiovisual
media. In those fields has been an ongoing transition to higher
resolutions, better color palette, screen refresh rate that would make
the medium even more transparent yet hyperreal. ‘The simplest definition
of “post-digital” describes a media aesthetics which opposes such
digital high-tech and high-fidelity cleanness.’[^48]

The New Aesthetic, similarly to the postdigital, rejects such a
fetishization of technological progress and the theoretical and
interpretative approaches that come with it. Kim Cascone used the term
for the first time in 2000 to describe how digitalization of the music
production workflow has changed the very principles of this creative
process.[^49] Similar<span id="The_postdigital_module"
class="anchor"></span>ly to the New Aesthetic a decade later, he focused
on abnormalities, errors, and glitches in electronically produced music
that were caused by specific commercial computational technologies
involved in the process, to grasp and critically analyze their
influence.

In the light of the above, it is hardly surprising that Cramer argues
that the postdigital can be used to describe the condition of
‘disenchantment with digital information systems and media gadgets, or a
period in which our fascination with these systems and gadgets has
become historical’.[^50] The first version of his article was written
only a few months after the Snowden revelations as part of a
contribution to the Transmediale 2014 Festival. In this context the
‘disenchantment’ would address the ultimate end of the ‘free internet’
paradigm that has reigned in popular culture for decades. The internet
that meant to be the great facilitator of the free circulation of
information and the cornerstone of a new media, remix and sharing
culture or the ‘web 2.0’ that was praised at the dawn of the new century
by Henry Jenkins, Tim O’Reilly and others, has been disclosed as an
ultimate surveillance machine and yet another space dominated by
profit-driven corporations. The ‘free internet’ narrative shares the
fate of the dot-com boom of the late 1990s.

Another understanding of the postdigital, which should be also
associated with the ‘disenchantment attitude’, comes with the revival of
‘old’ or better said mechanical or electrical media in the arts. Cramer
writes that we observe a ‘renaissance of artists’ printmaking, handmade
film labs, limited vinyl editions, the rebirth of the audio cassette,
mechanical typewriters, analog cameras and analog synthesizers’.[^51]
This trend is particularly visible in art schools (at least in the
Netherlands) where, according to Cramer, students prefer to work with
non-digital tools and techniques, and digital communication design and
new media is associated with commercial and mainstream. We could then
argue that after three decades of artists’ fascination by new
possibilities that the digital offers, part of the art community has
become discouraged by the constraints that are imposed on them by
commercial software and hardware, corporate media and a surveilled
internet. Consequently, some artists of the new generation of creatives
turn back to ‘old’ means of expression that are not dependent on the
limits and compromises that come with the use of computational
technologies of the present day – paper, canvas, paint, mechanical
tools, or electromechanical media at most, have again become means of
expression associated with the greatest degree of agency and control
over the creative process.

Cramer and Berry also write about a more economy-oriented strand of the
postdigital which is interested in ‘corporate’ media and technologies
and their increasing impact on society or culture. In the light of the
postdigital, the growing tensions between globalized techno-oligopolies
and the revived hacker culture manifested by the maker / DIY movement –
FabLabs Media Labs, local production etc. – should be considered as a
critical response to the powerful alliance of corporate technology and
money that dominates the so-called digital economy of the present day.
The postdigital could then be considered as yet another struggle to
regain political and economic agency in today’s world.

We believe that both the New Aesthetic condition and the postdigital are
signposts of yet another momentum in the everlasting cycle of
human-technology interaction. In the early stage of development of any
major set of tools or technologies the sentiments of skepticism and
disenchantment of the general public are often suppressed by the
optimism of early adopters and innovators. The fact that such critical
approaches as the New Aesthetic, the postdigital, post-internet,
post-capitalism etc. have lately emerged and are deeply concerned about
the role of computational technologies in today’s reality, only proves
the fact that the computational is no longer the avant-garde of our
civilization and as such is of minor importance to the general public.
On the contrary, it rather proves that it has become the condition of
existence of today’s reality and, for better or worse, has greatly
permeated our everyday lives.

[^1]: David Fodel and Matt Jenkins (curators), ‘Exhibition announcement:
    *The Emperor’s New Aesthetic*’, 9 September 2014, Rhizome,
    http://rhizome.org/announce/events/60873/view/.

[^2]: Norges Bank, ‘Motifs for the New Banknote Series’ (Press Release),
    7 October 2014,
    http://www.norges-bank.no/en/Published/Press-releases/2014/Press-release-7-october-2014/.

[^3]: The first entry on the New Aesthetic was published on Really
    Interesting Group website,
    http://www.riglondon.com/blog/2011/05/06/the-new-aesthetic/. Now the
    New Aesthetic project is available on Tumblr,
    http://new-aesthetic.tumblr.com.

[^4]: SXSW Schedule 2012, ‘The New Aesthetic: Seeing Like Digital
    Devices’, http://schedule.sxsw.com/2012/events/event\_IAP11102.

[^5]: Sterling, ‘An Essay on the New Aesthetic’.

[^6]: Adam Rothstein, ‘New Aesthetics – New Politics’, *POSZU blog*,
    April 2012, <http://www.poszu.com/new-aesthetics-new-politics.html>.

[^7]: Madeline Ashby, ‘The New Aesthetics of the Male Gaze’**,**
    *Madelineashby.com*, 2 April 2012, http://madelineashby.com/?p=1198.

[^8]: Will Wiles, ‘The Machine Haze’, *Aeon*, 17 September 2012,
    <https://aeon.co/essays/what-do-we-uncover-when-we-look-through-digital-eyes>.

[^9]: David M. Berry, ‘What Is the “New Aesthetic”?’, ‘Abduction
    Aesthetic: Computationality and the New Aesthetic’, *Stunlaw blog*,
    6 April 2012,
    http://stunlaw.blogspot.com/2012/04/abduction-aesthetic-computationality.html.

[^10]: Sterling, ‘An Essay on the New Aesthetic’.

[^11]: The irony doesn’t escape us, we promise you.

[^12]: David M. Berry, et. al. *New Aesthetic, New Anxieties*,
    Rotterdam: V2 Institute of Unstable Media, 2012.

[^13]: Berry, et. al. *New Aesthetic, New Anxieties,* p. 11.  

[^14]: Sterling, ‘An Essay on the New Aesthetic’.  

[^15]: Rober Urquhart, ‘An Interview With James Bridle of the New Aesthetic’, *The Huffington Post,* 9 May 2012,
    <http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/robert-urquhart/james-bridle-the-new-aesthetic_b_1498958.html>.

[^16]: J.J. Charlesworth, ‘We are the droids we’re looking for: the New Aesthetic and its friendly critics’, *JJ Charlesworth Blog*,7 May 2012, https://blogjjcharlesworth.wordpress.com/2012/05/07/we-are-the-droids-were-looking-for-the-new-aesthetic-and-its-friendly-critics/.

[^17]: Wim Westera, *The Digital Turn: How the Internet Transforms Our
    Existence*, 2015 (2013),
    <http://www.thedigitalturn.co.uk/TheDigitalTurn.pdf>, p. 125.

[^18]: David M. Berry, *Critical Theory and the Digital*, London:
    Bloomsbury, 2014, p. 121.

[^19]: Apple Inc., ‘iPhone 3G on Sale Tomorrow’ (Press release). 10
    July, 2008,
    http://www.apple.com/pr/library/2008/07/10iPhone-3G-on-Sale-Tomorrow.html.

[^20]: Sarah Perez, ‘iTunes App Store Now Has 1.2 Million Apps, Has Seen
    75 Billion Downloads To Date’, *TechCrunch*, 2 June, 2014,
    http://techcrunch.com/2014/06/02/itunes-app-store-now-has-1-2-million-apps-has-seen-75-billion-downloads-to-date/.

[^21]: The increasing size of the iPhone 6 Plus and the Samsung Galaxy
    phones notwithstanding, which mark a shift in design emphasis,
    upcoming products like the Apple Watch and wearable digital devices
    follow the trend of decreasing physical size.

[^22]: Don’t revolutions have winners and losers? If so, the digital
    clearly won.

[^23]: Mel Alexenberg, *The Future of Art in a Postdigital Age: From
    Hellenistic to Hebraic Consciousness*, Bristol: Intellect Ltd, 2011,
    p. 35.

[^24]: James Bridle, *The New Aesthetic blog*, Tumblr,
    <http://new-aesthetic.tumblr.com/about>.

[^25]: James Bridle, ‘Waving at the Machines’, Web Directions South
    2011, Sydney, 11-14 October 2011,
    <http://www.webdirections.org/resources/james-bridle-waving-at-the-machines/>.

[^26]: Vilém Flusser, *Towards a Philosophy of Photography*, London:
    Reaktion Books Ltd, 2000, p. 195.

[^27]: Flusser, *Towards a Philosophy of Photography*, p. 20.

[^28]: Flusser, *Towards a Philosophy of Photography*, p. 75.

[^29]: Palladio Humanities thinking with data,
    http://hdlab.stanford.edu/projects/palladio/.

[^30]: Thomas Faith and Joseph Wicentowski, ‘Visualizing the History of
    U.S. Foreign Relations: The State of TEI at

    Foggy Bottom’,
    http://tei.northwestern.edu/files/2014/04/Faith-Wicentowski-1ntyfbr.pdf.

[^31]: TXTBKS,
    https://www.thinkwithgoogle.com/campaigns/smart-communications-txtbks.html.

[^32]: Lev Manovich, *Software Takes Command*, London: Bloomsbury, 2013,
    p. 207.

[^33]: Wikipedia contributors. ‘Multiplan’, *Wikipedia,* 31 August 2014,
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiplan.

[^34]: Lev Manovich, *The Language of New Media*, London: MIT Press,
    2002, p. 63.

[^35]: David M. Berry, *Understanding Digital Humanities*, London:
    Palgrave Macmillan, 2012, p. 10 and David M. Berry, *The Philosophy
    of Software Code and Mediation in a Digital Age*, London: Palgrave
    Macmillan, 2011, p. 36, 65, 137.

[^36]: David M. Berry, *Critical Theory and the Digital*. p. 66.

[^37]: Marianne van den Bommen, *Transcoding the Digital: How Metaphors
    Matter in New Media*, Amsterdam, Institute of Network Cultures,
    2014, p. 15.

[^38]: Matthew Fuller, *Media Ecologies: Materialist Energies in Art and
    Technoculture*, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2005, p. 93.

[^39]: Fuller, *Media Ecologies*, p. 95

[^40]: Fuller, *Media Ecologies*, p. 105.

[^41]: Berry, et. al., *New Aesthetic, New Anxieties,* p. 41.

[^42]: David M. Berry, *The Philosophy of Software Code and Mediation in
    a Digital Age*, London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011, p. 27.

[^43]: Florian Cramer, ‘What is ‘Post-digital’?’, *A Peer-reviewed
    Journal about Post-digital Research* (2015), vol. 3, issue 1, p. 3.,
    http://www.aprja.net/?p=1318.

[^44]: David Berry and Michael Dieter (eds) *Postdigital Aesthetics:
    Art, Computation and Design*, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2015,
    p. 3.

[^45]: Cramer, ‘What is ‘Post-digital’?’, p. 10.

[^46]: Cramer, ‘What is ‘Post-digital’?’, p. 4.

[^47]: Cramer, ‘What is ‘Post-digital’?’, p. 7.

[^48]: Cramer, ‘What is ‘Post-digital’?’, p. 6.

[^49]: Kim Cascone ‘The Aesthetics of Failure: ‘Post- Digital’
    Tendencies in Contemporary Computer Music’, *Computer Music Journal*
    24, No. 4 (Winter 2000), pp. 12-18.

[^50]: Cramer, ‘What is ‘Post-digital’?’, p. 3.

[^51]: Cramer, ‘What is ‘Post-digital’?’, pp. 3-4.
