#Introduction

The increasing digitalization of our everyday lives has been marked by
the appearances of new forms of visual manifestations that do more than
simply provide information but have become autonomous objects that
transform how we live. In a pervasive fashion, such phenomena – whether
they appear on our smartphone, our computers, our enhanced televisions,
billboards and advertisements and a myriad of other forms – have taken
on their own lives becoming seemingly autonomous and out of our control.
What is intriguing and, for some, troubling about these new digital
objects is not just that they exist and function without human
intervention and input but that we readily accept their presence in our
lives. Cutting edge technologies and trends such as machine learning,
adaptive algorithms, big data and Internet of Things rapidly foster
emergence of stand-alone computational ecosystems and entities. Although
they are of human design, most of their everyday interactions are not
directly human-centered; therefore, while purportedly enriching our
experiences the programs we use on our smartphones and other devices
have begun to have lives outside of our control, acting for us without
our knowledge; retaining information about our lives, our interactions
with software today generates and constitutes the existence of the
digital phenomena that start to take on lives of their own. Smartphones
are the easiest example to use because the choices we make about what we
want to know about the world through them and the choices we make when
we act in the world are then stored, redefined, altered and represented
to us in a manner which is seemingly natural and tailored to our own
choices but which is also artificially created and manipulative. To put
it another way, digital phenomena have become entities in their own
right, functioning in a way that allows us to believe we are in control
of our world when, in fact, the exact opposite is taking place as we
respond to these entities. On an everyday basis, most of us are screen
essentialists as the field of our human-machine interaction is limited
to the information displayed on the screen. And what makes these
entities even more difficult to comprehend is not so much the control
they have over our lives but their independence from their original
sources; interactive software very quickly takes on a life of its own
far beyond its programmers’ intentions when acquiring more data and
allowing its algorithms to respond and reprogram itself in response to
that data. Jean Baudrillard’s notion of the simulacrum was insufficient;
the world hasn’t become a simulation of our own making but a simulation
of our simulations’ making, as we are increasingly living in their world
not our own. Contemporary society and culture have become effectively
data feed.

The New Aesthetic has been described as ‘an attitude, a feeling, *a
sensibility*’. In part a reflection of the expanding use of digital
technology, it has increasingly become an indication at almost an
essentialist level of specific artistic and design tendencies and
practices. The concept of the New Aesthetic was initiated by James
Bridle on his blog in 2011 where he started to gather images and things
that seemed to identify a new aesthetic of the future. The term is used
to describe the increasing presence in the physical world of such visual
phenomena rooted in digital technology and the internet, in an effort to
describe the increasing proliferation of visual languages dependent on
self-generative computational structures rather than on natural
language. Bridle’s Tumblr blog was instrumental in curating New
Aesthetic objects but others have added to the theorization of the idea.
Science fiction writer and futurist Bruce Sterling has developed a
response that articulates its impact in social, political, cultural and
artistic terms. Describing a set of artifacts that he believes
represents a conflation of the digital and the real, Sterling has said
of the New Aesthetic:

>  \[It\] is a native product of modern network culture. It’s from London, but it was born digital, on the Internet. The New Aesthetic is a “theory object” and a “shareable concept.” The New Aesthetic is “collectively intelligent.” It’s diffuse, crowdsourcing, and made of many small pieces loosely joined. It is rhizomatic, as the people at Rhizome would likely tell you. It’s open-sourced, and triumph-of-amateurs. It’s like its logo, a bright cluster of balloons tied to some huge, dark and lethal weight.[^00-Introduction_1]

Sterling’s comment that New Aesthetic objects are rhizomatic is,
unknowingly perhaps, derived from Gilles Deleuze’s and Félix Guattari’s
notion of the rhizome as a metaphor for multiple entry points and
representations of information into life, but he goes beyond their
concept by asserting the phenomenological independence of New Aesthetic
objects. Everyday interaction between human and consumer technology has
been intensifying for the last decade: the internet at its most
fundamental level of functionality, portable devices, mobile internet,
web 2.0 and, lately, big data (where so much information is collected in
large databases that it becomes impossible to access, use or control
without adaptive algorithms and machine learning) amongst others have
all deeply influenced contemporary civilization. What makes this
influence different is how little choice the users have when they are
relinquishing control of their existences to these media where the
interaction has transformed from being merely intensive to pervasive and
unseen.

Obviously, James Bridle and Bruce Sterling were not the first ones to
notice what is taking place; Marshall McLuhan set the stage with his
theories of communication and media, Lev Manovich’s books *The Language
of New Media* and *Software Takes Command* have been instrumental in
describing recent changes, and David M. Berry’s notion of
computationality in *The Philosophy of Software: Code and Mediation in
the Digital Age* and *Critical Theory and The Digital* is an attempt to
describe social and cultural changes in the digital era. All have
brought insightful and invaluable perspectives to new notions of the
document and the role computational devices have in our lives, but
Bridle in particular deserves credit for coining the term ‘New
Aesthetic’ because it is the first term which articulates these changes
at social, cultural and political levels. Others have criticized it: the
New Aesthetic has been dismissed and labeled as a superficial
identification of artistic practices that have already taken place for
some time, and for many critics there is nothing new about New
Aesthetic. We do not agree with this because we believe the term takes
into account multiple layers and modes of human technology interaction
which are mediated by computational media and technological artifacts
that need to be understood at an ontological level as a means of
redefining what the world is; the New Aesthetic does more than identify
a sufficiently distinct category of aesthetic products while challenging
many of the normative conventions of aesthetics itself. ‘It posits an
aesthetic turn \[…\] brought about itself through a “new nature”’[^00-Introduction_2]
and, in doing so, creates that new nature and a new holistic perspective
for describing it. In a way, it signals a sense of
hyper-contemporaneity.

To this end, we are taking two positions vis-à-vis New Aesthetic. First,
we believe the New Aesthetic should not be considered as a mere theory
of beauty or simple theory of beauty for the digital 21st century. In a
broader perspective we would consider it as a theoretical approach that
would enable taking to the forefront of our perception intertwined
layers of algorithms and computation that contemporary civilization is
built on. More narrowly, we are focusing on the New Aesthetic as an
innovative interdisciplinary approach that is interested in describing
specific types of digital imagery. At this level we would analyze it as
an ‘aesthetics of computational miscalculation’ and as an ‘aesthetics of
digital age’, taking into account: glitches, compression and codec
artifacts, satellite images. It is not about aesthetics understood as in
art theory or philosophy. The approach embodied by the New Aesthetic
strives for ‘seeing the grain of computation’ and ‘an eruption of the
digital into the physical’ and ‘emergence of computationality as an
onto-theology’. The New Aesthetic has sparked the practical interest of
artists, curators and designers and has become a subject of theoretical
inquiry for journalists and scholars. From a classic academic
perspective it may seem vague, inaccurate and simply not worthy of any
attention. However, any scholar interested in contemporary society and
culture should take into account such movement.

Secondly, it is impossible to think of the New Aesthetic without
thinking of it as an aesthetic system related to artistic productivity.
The expanding use of digital technology has been increasingly recognized
as worthy of interest in aesthetics and in the art world; from projected
cybernetic utopias and virtual realities to global awareness of artistic
trends and unique art worlds, from the direct use of digital techniques
as both the means of production and as art itself to its use as a means
of facilitating new insights into art history, digital technology’s
impact has become pervasive and even, perhaps, common. While there have
been numerous discussions of the effects of digital technology on
artistic production and aesthetic evaluation, until recently there’s
been little discussion of the digital as a language that functions
independently of our normal concerns. Thinking through this idea we’ve
identified two sets of questions. First, how has the digitalization of
the world as it appears in a digital format affected our aesthetic
perceptions of such appearances? Second, how has the digitalization of
the world in the form of the New Aesthetic changed the way art is being
produced today? Answering these questions involves more than just
describing the stylization of GUIs or the latest updates to the software
that runs iPhones but requires both asking questions about the
assessment process that users go through when looking at digital
manifestations as well as looking at art specifically made in a digital
format. Particularly nowadays, when any type of digital imagery,
including visual arts, undergoes the same computational processes:
quantization and discretization – continuous reality is transformed into
set of variables.

The software used in mapping programs transforms the way we interact
with and navigate a geographic location but it also has aesthetic
qualities itself that work behind the scenes, if you will, and subtly
transform and manipulate digitally our actual movement and enjoyment of
space; to put it another way, whether we like a restaurant, book shop,
art gallery, local neighborhood or even an entire city may be dependent
on the way information about all of these is presented to us and, even
further, how that information evolves in databases controlled by the
software. This could go so far as a software application ‘defining’ an
entire country geographically by noting at certain scales the locations
of fast food restaurants. With the work of artists who use digital
techniques we have an entirely different but related set of issues: are
artists utilizing the digital media merely as a means towards an end or
is the creative process guided by the software regardless of artists’
intentions? Artists like Mathieu Tremblin, Benjamin Grosser and Aram
Bartholl have been creating work that explores the implications not only
of the use of digital media but also our ability to control such media.

What needs to be addressed is how New Aesthetic objects or New Aesthetic
art objects – and there absolutely is a difference – necessitate new
forms of aesthetic evaluation. It can be argued that advocating an
increasing awareness of the inescapabilty of digital manifestations
opposes the continuation of aesthetics in the traditional sense as it
finds itself practically incapable of accounting for an aesthetic system
that is self-substantiating; old ways of looking at art, of describing
the beauty of objects, are no longer relevant when the objects
themselves respond to our sensibilities and craft themselves towards
their understanding of our very intentions of aesthetic judgment.
Because manifestations of the New Aesthetic are based in computational
language, algorithms and self-replicating systems of code, it is
necessary to question whether traditional accounts are viable or whether
the very notions of beauty, pleasure, idealism and expressiveness are
reducible to mathematical structures or simply incompatible with natural
language when assessing New Aesthetic objects.

What is striking about New Aesthetic art objects is not just their
origins in digital media but their appearance as natural evolving out of
our digital experiences. Nowadays, the landscape of potential ‘artistic
images’ is basically endless as images are part of everyday software and
information ecosystems and are ‘produced’ thanks to capabilities of
other software. It is no longer strange to think of images as
‘photoshopped’ because all normatively perceivable images are assumed to
be digitally altered in some fashion. Thus, all contemporary images
share the same digital DNA (creative software ecosystems, filers,
effects, codecs, color spaces). What is strange, rather, is how natural
the assumption itself has become. Of course many artists continue to
work in traditional methods and materials, but increasingly digital
methods become the foundations or the starting point. It might seem
strange to say that we’re going to end up talking about Kant at some
point – at first it might seem like Kant would be the last person that
has anything to do with the New Aesthetic – but it is by looking at
Kant’s little regarded ‘Critique of Teleological Judgment’ in his
*Critique of Judgment* that some interesting insights emerge about New
Aesthetic objects in general and art specifically.

Where we’ve ended up with these two perspectives – the theoretical,
which seeks to understand the metaphysics of New Aesthetic
manifestations, and the aesthetic, which seeks to assess the valuative
and creative processes involved in the creation of New Aesthetic objects
– is not at a pair of incompatible positions but a fluxual dialectic
that articulates what we believe is a pervasive and unavoidable
development in our world. The New Aesthetic isn’t merely simply a
recognition that software is becoming a guiding principle for our
experience of the world nor a new form of digital creativity but is a
determinative aspect of contemporary existence. Today’s image is often a
software product, implemented in and by another software construct, as
Lev Manovich argues; we have entered an era when media *are* software.
Given that media are software, and given the growing ubiquity of media
and its effects on our lives, we believe the New Aesthetic is more than
just an attitude but a defining feature of contemporary existence. The
New Aesthetic is not without its limitations. It is hardly a firm
academic theory or methodology. However, being aware of the limitations
behind the idea, we argue that in order to examine a fluxual social and
cultural context of the digital age one has to take an equally
unconventional and fluxual approach.

[^00-Introduction_1]: Bruce Sterling, ‘An Essay on the New Aesthetic’, *Wired.com*, 2
April 2012, [http://www.wired.com/2012/04/an-essay-on-the-new-aesthetic/](http://www.wired.com/2012/04/an-essay-on-the-new-aesthetic/).

[^00-Introduction_2]: James Bridle, ‘Waving at the Machines’, Web Directions South 2011, 5 December 2011, Sydney, [http://booktwo.org/notebook/waving-at-machines/](http://booktwo.org/notebook/waving-at-machines/).  
  
    