# <span id="_Toc321914225" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc321914119" class="anchor"></span></span>Acknowledgements

This book has been written by two authors who at first glance could not
be more different, from different academic background, at a different
moments of career development and from different generations. Scott is a
full professor at East Tennessee State University, where he teaches art
history in the Department of Art & Design and aesthetics in the
Department of Philosophy & Humanities with a primary research focus in
aesthetic ontology and Lacan. Łukasz is a an early-career researcher,
enrolled as a PhD student in cultural studies at the University’s of
Warsaw Faculty of ‘Artes Liberales’ while collaborating with the newly
founded Digital Economy Lab (DELab) at the University of Warsaw. He also
works as a journalist and consultant covering emerging digital
technologies, digital society and culture.

This book had its start at the International Congress of Aesthetics, a
highly select and ambitious international conference devoted to
aesthetics, art and media study, held in Kraków, Poland in the summer of
2013. Assigned to speak on the same panel because we were presenting on
the same topic – digital autonomy and the New Aesthetic – we quickly
realized that we had many more overlapping academic interests. As a
result of our first meeting on the first day of the conference we
decided to take a more creative approach to our presentations, splitting
them up so that each could address the areas we planned on covering in a
logical sequence and inadvertently taking over the dynamic of the
successful session. Since our time in Kraków, we have been exchanging
ideas and quickly realized that publishing a co-authored book would be a
perfect opportunity to collaboratively produce an introduction to New
Aesthetics incorporating not only an approach ensconced in a broad
theoretical of digital technology’s impact but also its impact on the
contemporary art world.

We would like to thank: the Institute of Network Cultures at the
Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences for giving us the possibility
to publish our work with them, and particularly Miriam Rasch and Nadine
Roestenburg for taking great care of us throughout the writing, editing
and publishing process; East Tennessee State University’s Office of
Research & Sponsored Programs, Department of Art & Design and Honors
College, all of whom provided specific financial support that made the
project possible in its final stages; the Polish government, which
financed Łukasz’ work from the budget for science of the Republic of
Poland as a research project within the ‘Diamond Grant’ programme in
2012-16; and the artists included herein, many of whom supplied
information and images about their work and were incredibly gracious in
their responses to our inquiries.

For the last 4 years Łukasz has been a research director of a project
funded by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education. This
early-career research grant allowed Łukasz to meet and share ideas with
many distinguished scholars whose knowledge, insight and support were
crucial for emergence of many ideas presented in the book. He is
particularly grateful to the research community of the Digital
Aesthetics Research Center / Participation Information Technologies
Group at the University of Aarhus where he spent some time as a visiting
researcher in 2014. He would like to also thank the research community
of the Sussex Humanities Lab at the University of Sussex where he was a
visiting Ph.D. student in 2015.

Scott would like to thank his many friends and colleagues across many
disciplines in his university and his family and friends. He especially
thanks his wife and son Karlota and Anton for their love and support;
the book would never have been finished as soon as it was if Karlota
didn’t encourage him to go to Warsaw for a few days, and Anton appears
in one of the images inside.

Łukasz would like to express particular thanks to Christian Ulrik
Andersen (Aarhus University), David M. Berry (University of Sussex),
Piotr Celiński (Maria Curie-Skłodowska-University), Damien Charrieras
(City University of Hong Kong), Lev Manovich (CUNY), Søren Bro Pold
(Aarhus University), Krzysztof Rutkowski (University of Warsaw), Winnie
Soon (Aarhus University) and Piotr Wilczek (University of Warsaw). You
have always been kind and very supportive. Your ongoing encouragement
pushed me to work even harder to develop my ideas.

Scott Contreras-Koterbay  
Łukasz Mirocha  
Johnson City, TN, USA  
Brighton, UK  
Warsaw, Poland  
2014-2016
  
   
  
    
    